This is the Enhanced Reader view. For maximum accessibility screen reader users should use the HTML format which is available on the article page for most content.
OutlineCited byFigures (11)
1/12



Previous PDFNext PDF
Article start
Future Generation Computer Systems 106 (2020) 22–33
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Future Generation Computer Systems
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/fgcs
A zone-based content pre-caching strategy in vehicular edge networks
Hui Guo, Lan-lan Rui ∗, Zhi-peng Gao
State Key Laboratory of Networking and Switching Technology, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing 100876, China
a r t i c l e i n f o
Article history:
Received 14 August 2019
Received in revised form 13 November 2019
Accepted 30 December 2019
Available online 7 January 2020
Keywords:
Vehicular edge networks
Content pre-caching
Zone-based
Zone sojourn time
a b s t r a c t
Content pre-caching is a kind of significant technology to lower response delay and improve network
performance, especially for the delay-sensitive services in dynamic vehicular edge networks. Therefore,
in this paper, we propose a zone-based content pre-caching strategy, which aims to implement an
active content caching through two algorithms: pre-caching zone selecting algorithm- PCZS and pre-
caching node selecting algorithm- PCNS. Firstly, we organize the edge servers (ESs) with a zone-based
way at the edge, and assign a Manager node to collect the information of each zone; with the help of
road topology and tables information recorded in Manager nodes, PCZS can predict the vehicle motion
and zone sojourn time with a high accuracy, and further get a content pre-caching zone by comparing
estimated request delay and zone sojourn time; then, PCNS checks whether the content has been
cached in the CST of the zone selected by PCZS, if CST hits, the pre-caching process is over, otherwise,
by combining ES centrality, load degree with content popularity, we perform PCNS to select a specific
ES node to pre-cache the content; simulation results show that our strategy has a higher prediction
accuracy and dynamic adaptability, it also outperforms in terms of average response delay and cache
hit ratio.
© 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND
license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
1. Introduction
Under the rapid proliferation of mobile network technology
and devices, we have witnessed an unprecedented mobile data
explosion in the past decade. Cisco predicts that the growth rate
of global mobile traffic will reach 7.2 exabytes per month in
2021 [1]. On the basis of cloud computing technology, we can
handle mobile requests with centralized cloud servers locating
in remote core networks [2]. However, in edge networks, such
as MANET (mobile ad hoc network), VANET (vehicular ad hoc
network) and so on, it is no longer suitable to serve the massive
distributed and dynamic edge requests through a central com-
puting model [3]. On the one hand, remote computing resource
and long-distance data transmission not only increase the mobile
network load greatly [4], but also cause a high transmission
delay and low QOE (Quality of Experience) to users; on the other
hand, the centralized resource management is not good for the
protection of data privacy and security [5,6], for example, during
the process of uploading and downloading, the transmitted data
is easy to be leaked or attacked.
Motivated by the above issues, edge computing [7] is put
forward and further applied to mobile networks [8,9]: by placing
edge servers (ESs) at mobile network edge, mobile edge com-
puting (MEC) transforms the cloud servers deployment from a
∗ Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: guohui@bupt.edu.cn (H. Guo), llrui@bupt.edu.cn
(L.-l. Rui).
remote centralized to a near-edge distributed mode [10], which
offers a better support (caching capacity, computing power and so
on) for mobile services [11] , thus ensuring a faster response for
dynamic requests and lowering delay significantly; what is more,
edge computing avoids the remote data transmission process and
its distributed deployment increases the difficulty and threshold
of attack; it is also worth mentioning that security mechanism at
the small-scale edge would be more flexible and efficient, such as
introducing blockchain technology [12,13]
In vehicular edge networks, in spite of the above advantages,
the continuity of mobile services is hard to be guaranteed due
to the short-period dynamic connections caused by limited ser-
vice coverage and users’ fast movement [14], frequent service
interruptions and connection handovers lead to a high delay and
servere network performance degradation. Therefore, focusing on
the delay-sensitive services in vehicular edge networks, we think
it is valuable to have the contents to be pre-downloaded when ve-
hicles are approaching ESs, such that the short vehicle-correlated
connection can be fully dedicated to content response process,
and then a zone-based content pre-caching strategy is designed to
achieve proactive content caching in dynamic vehicular networks.
We think the benefits of our work lie in the followings.
• We design a zone-based organization for edge servers (ESs),
which not only enlarges the computing power and storage
capacity of ESs, but also expands their coverage to a bigger
zone, it is conducive to enhancing the continuity of dynamic
services and reducing the connection handovers.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.future.2019.12.050
0167-739X/© 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-
nc-nd/4.0/).
Hui GuoLan-lan RuiZhi-peng Gao[1][2][3][4][5,6][7][8,9][10][11][12,13][14]
H. Guo, L.-l. Rui and Z.-p. Gao / Future Generation Computer Systems 106 (2020) 22–33 23
• We propose a pre-caching zone selecting algorithm-PCZS.
Upon the road topology and tables information recorded in
Manager nodes, PCZS can predict the vehicle motion with a
high accuracy, and further get a content pre-caching zone by
comparing estimated request delay and zone sojourn time,
which pledges the future requests will be served timely and
improves the dynamic adaptability and reliability of mobile
pre-caching strategy.
• We also design a pre-caching node selecting algorithm-
PCNS. After PCZS, it is necessary to check whether the con-
tent has been cached in the CST of the selected zone imme-
diately, if CST hits PCNS is over. Otherwise, we perform PCNS
by taking ES centrality, load degree and content popularity
into account, and aim to find an ES with a lower workload
to reduce the future response delay.
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the
related works. Section 3 presents the system designing in detail.
Our proposed zone-based content pre-caching strategy is elabo-
rated in Section 4. The experimental evaluation and performance
results are presented in Section 5. Finally, Section 6 concludes this
paper and foresees future works.
2. Related works
An efficient contents pre-caching scheme is meaningful for
improving network performance, the relevant studies are emerg-
ing constantly, and we have made a performance comparsion in
Table 1.
To shorten the distance between mobile users (MU) and com-
puter resources and reduce the content download delay, re-
searchers from Carnegie Mellon University propose a mobile
content caching and prediction strategy [15] for MobilityFirst ar-
chitecture. Firstly, they design a separate popularity based cache
and a prefetch buffer at the network edge to capture both long-
term and short-term content access patterns. Next, a prediction
model based on the aggregated network-level statistics is put
forward. With Markov chain and a real motion data set [16],
the scheme can predict the movement of MU from spatial and
temporal dimensions, and then obtain the estimated residence
time, motion direction and pre-fetching content for a specific MU.
Simulation results show it has a good performance in prediction
accuracy and cache hit ratio, but it depends on MobilityFirst
architecture, which limits its scalability strictly.
Ref. [17] shows a content pre-fetching scheme to deal with
the dynamic topology in 5G-VANET, authors think the prefetch-
ing scheme should associate with multi-place and multi-factor,
by mining the historical trace data and using machine learning
technology, they could combine the driver preference with road
topology and navigation information to predict the travel journey
of vehicles. Moreover, there are two types of prefetching nodes:
vehicles and Micro Base Stations (MBSs), on the one hand, the
vehicles whose routes have a wider coverage over the road are
selected as the place for prefetching; on the other hand, the
prefetching MBSs are decided by the real-time traffic prediction.
Researchers verify their design on SUMO and NS-3 platform. We
think the design of content pre-fetching lacks the consideration
of vehicular dynamic parameters, which are important factors to
improve its adaptability to the mobile environment.
Researchers of [18] believe that prefetching the correspond-
ing content before users’ requests can effectively reduce content
transmission time, and it is essential to determine what should
be prefetched and when and where to prefetch, thus they design
a vehicle mobility prediction-based over-the-top (OTT) content
prefetching solution. Firstly, they have a vehicle mobility predic-
tion module to estimate vehicles’ future connected roadside units
(RSUs); then a multi-tier caching mechanism with an OTT con-
tent popularity estimation scheme is considered to forecast the
content request distribution, and the solution also implements a
learning-based algorithm to proactively prefetch the user content
at RSUs; finally, the authors prove their design can optimize
network resource utilization and reduce bandwidth consumption.
But we think the definition of predictive quality function can be
further optimized and refined, for example, taking into account
the dynamic network parameters.
Some works focus on using OBU (On Board Unit) as con-
tent caching. Yao et al. [19] propose using prediction based on
Partial Matching method (PPM) to predict vehicles’ probability
of reaching different hot spot regions and select nodes with
longer sojourn time in a hot region as caching nodes. However,
PPM-based approach is only suitable for selecting users belonged
to grouped cluster, which does not fit with RSU-OBU content
prefetching scenarios; the hot region would change in the dy-
namic environment, and it lacks a real-time updating mechanism;
the selection of cache nodes can also be further improved, such
as taking the nodes’ workload into account.
A content pre-fetching operation can improve network perfor-
mance only when it is performed timely and accurately, there-
fore, the work in [20] gives a cohesive end-to-end architecture,
which fully exploits Information-Centric Networking (ICN) to-
gether with the Mobile Follow-Me Cloud (FMC) approach. By
considering the evolution of content popularity, which is used by
a caching algorithm to keep track of the user requests, the scheme
attains content-availability improvements of up to 500% when
a mobile user performs a request and compared against other
existing solutions. However, the impact of the dynamic model
building overhead is not considered in the experiments.
The work in [21] focuses on prefetching content to the clients’
devices. Caching and prefetching are highly intertwined as both of
them require a deep understanding of the content characteristics,
and work towards the goal of reducing peak bandwidth consump-
tion. Therefore, a content distribution network in vehicles should
consider the particularities of each content object [22] that will be
cached. However, they all neglects the function of users’ motion
and network parameters changing, it is not enough to make a
prefetching decision with content attributes.
In this paper, we focus on the delay-sensitive services in
vehicular edge networks and propose a zone-based content pre-
caching strategy with PCZS and PCNS algorithms. Compared with
the above research, our scheme has taken account of the vehicular
motion parameters, road topology, network load and content
popularity, so it has a much better dynamic adaptability and
motion prediction accuracy.
3. System models
3.1. Terminology
We list the notation and terminology used in this paper in Ta-
ble 2. It should be noted that in order to ensure the reliability and
availability of dynamic parameters, we discretize time slots into
successive detection periods, and the duration of each period is T
seconds, at the beginning of a new period, the parameters would
be updated upon the information collected from the previous
period.
3.2. Network model
The network architecture is shown in Fig. 1. Firstly, We or-
ganize ESs and vehicles with a zone-based way, a zone covers
several connected ESs (Manager nodes act as access point) and
ESs in different zone are connectionless, ESs have an equal and
[15][16][17][18][19][20][21][22]Fig. 1
Previous PDFNext PDF
