This is the Enhanced Reader view. For maximum accessibility screen reader users should use the HTML format which is available on the article page for most content.
Outline
1/9



Article start
Hypotheses in Kant's philosophy of science
Andrew Cooper
Department of Philosophy, University of Warwick, Coventry, CV4 7AL, UK
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Kant
Laws of nature
Hypotheses
Scientific method
Necessitation
A B S T R A C T
In this paper I extend the case for a necessitation account of particular laws in Kant's philosophy of science by
examining the relation between reason's hypothetical use in the Appendix to the Transcendental Dialectic and the
legitimate hypotheses identified in the Doctrine of Method. Building on normative accounts of reason's ideas, I
argue that reason's hypothetical use does not describe the connections between objects and their grounds, which
lie beyond the reach of the understanding, but merely prescribes the relations between appearances and their
conditions, for which the understanding must seek. A legitimate hypothesis, I suggest, is a proposition we hold to
be true that fills in one or several of those relations. The problematic character of hypotheses requires that we
evaluate our reasons for holding them to be true. While natural modality is grounded in the nature of things,
which cannot be fully known, our reasons for assent can and must be grounded on features of objects that are
epistemically available to us.
1. Introduction
What distinguishes a law of nature from a generalization about nat-
ural facts? The necessity we typically associate with a natural law is not
satisfied by a proposition that merely tracks a natural process (all
observed xs have P). It is satisfied by a proposition that presents a gov-
erning relation, which contains a robust modal thought (if X were the
case, then Y necessarily would be the case). This modal thought separates
accidently true generalizations, such as ‘all trees in Jane's garden are
jacarandas', from laws of nature, such as ‘jacaranda seeds grow into
jacaranda trees.’ If I were to throw any old seed into Jane's garden, and if
that seed were to grow, it wouldn't necessarily be a jacaranda. Yet if I
were to throw a jacaranda seed in Jane's garden, and if that seed were to
grow, then it would, necessarily, be a jacaranda.
The modal thought that characterizes laws of nature is captured by W.
E. Johnson's (1924, pp. 4–5) separation of ‘universals of fact’ from ‘uni-
versals of law’. For Johnson, universals of fact take the form ‘all Xs are
Ys’; for example, all metals expand when heated. Universals of fact entail
a logical form of necessity that analytically follows from a concept.
Universals of law, in contrast, take the form, ‘If anything of some given
kind were characterized as X, it would be characterized as Y’; anything,
being metal, would expand if it were heated. In contrast to logical
necessity, universals of law carry what Johnson terms ‘nomic’ necessity.
The grammatical shift from universals of fact to universals of law extends
the range of the law into the modal realm—from the actual to the pos-
sible—which implies a shift from epistemology to metaphysics. This
raises a puzzle for philosophers of science. If natural laws are determined
metaphysically, and if scientific method begins with experience, how can
we come to know them?
In his critical philosophy, Kant advances a radical account of the
epistemology and metaphysics of the laws of nature. Critique of Pure
Reason (1781/7) outlines a new conception of epistemology in which
human cognition prescribes certain laws to nature that make it the case
that objects are structured in a determinate way. The law that ‘everything
that happens has its cause’ (A9/B13) is transcendentally necessary, for
any relation between two states we call a ‘happening’ (that is, any change
in an object) presupposes the concept of the relation of cause and effect.1
Yet as Kant argues in Metaphysical Foundations of Natural Science (1786),
it is also nomically necessary, for the synthetic application of causality to
all possible objects entails that it has the metaphysical correlate, ‘every
change in matter has an external cause’ (MF 4:543). The correlate is
nomically necessary, for it is necessarily true for any possible change in
material nature. The determination of every change for cognition does
not merely track regularities that happen to hold in nature. It tells us how
E-mail address: andrew.j.cooper@warwick.ac.uk.
1 References to Kant's works refer to the volume and page number of Kants gesammelte Schriften, Akadamie Ausgabe. They are given in text using the following
abbreviations: MH ¼ Metaphysik Herder; ML ¼ Metaphysik L; BL ¼ Blomberg Logic; VL ¼ Vienna Logic; J€asche Logic ¼ JL; MF ¼ Metaphysical Foundations of Natural Science;
P ¼ Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics; CPJ ¼ Critique of the Power of Judgment; PG ¼ Physical Geography. Citations to Critique of Pure Reason follow the customary
A/B pagination. Where possible, translations are taken from the Cambridge editions noted in the reference list.
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Studies in History and Philosophy of Science
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/shpsa
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.shpsa.2022.04.007
Available online xxxx
0039-3681/© 2022 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
Studies in History and Philosophy of Science xxx (xxxx) xxx
Please cite this article as: Cooper, A., Hypotheses in Kant's philosophy of science, Studies in History and Philosophy of Science, https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.shpsa.2022.04.007
Andrew CooperW.E. Johnson's (1924MF
