This is the Enhanced Reader view. For maximum accessibility screen reader users should use the HTML format which is available on the article page for most content.
Outline
1/9



Previous PDFNext PDF
Article start
Futures 142 (2022) 102993
Available online 12 July 2022
0016-3287/© 2022 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).Limits of conceivability in the study of the future. Lessons from
philosophy of science☆
Veli Virmajoki
Finland Futures Research Centre, University of Turku, Verkapiha 1 as. 31 20100, Turku, Finland
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Conceivability
Counterfactuals
Alternative futures
Plausible futures
Possible futures
History
Philosophy of science
A B S T R A C T
In this paper, the epistemological and conceptual limits of our ability to conceive and reason
about future possibilities are analyzed. It is argued that more attention should be paid in futures
studies on these epistemological and conceptual limits. Drawing on three cases from philosophy
of science, the paper argues that there are deep epistemological and conceptual limits in our
ability to conceive and reason about alternatives to the current world. The nature and existence of
these limits are far from obvious and become visible only through careful investigation. The cases
establish that we often are unable to conceive relevant alternatives; that historical and coun-
terfactual considerations are more limited than has been suggested; and that the present state of
affairs reinforces its hegemony through multiple conceptual and epistemological mechanisms.
The paper discusses the reasons behind the limits of the conceivability and the consequences that
follow from the considerations that make the limits visible. The paper suggests that the episte-
mological and conceptual limits in our ability to conceive and reason about possible futures
should be mapped systematically. The mapping would provide a better understanding of the
creative and critical bite of futures studies.
1. Introduction
In futures studies, possible, probable, and preferable futures are studied (Amara 1974; Bell, 2009 [1997]). To formulate future
scenarios and to vision alternative futures require that one is able to conceive and reason about states of affairs that differ from the
current state of affairs. Much of the theoretical and methodological discussion in futures studies concern the nature, limits, and
prospects of the processes that aim to produce the scenarios of the future. The question is usually how to systematically formulate and
identify relevant and plausible scenarios. It is remarkable that the underlying ability to conceive and reason about possible futures is
often taken for granted, and the main questions concerns how to tease out, resource, and encourage the ability. This assumption is well
characterized when Bell writes that “[t]he exploration of possible futures includes trying to look at the present in new and different
ways, often deliberately breaking out of the straitjacket of conventional, orthodox, or traditional thinking and taking unusual, even
unpopular perspectives” (2009, p. 76–77) and his main warning concerns rejecting ideas out of hand (2009, 78). This
taking-for-granted is true of even the most critical tones about the practices described by Bell. For example, when Groves argues that it
can “be problematic to represent the future as empty, as open to being written” (Groves, 2017), the assumption is made that we can
conceive a variety of alternative futures. It is, in fact, the source of the problem. Also, Slaughter’s eerie warning that “What [futures
studies] cannot, and in this view, should not do in this historical moment is to imply that there are any generically alternative global
☆ This study was funded by Kone Foundation
E-mail address: vevirm@utu.fi.
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Futures
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/futures
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.futures.2022.102993
Received 1 January 2022; Received in revised form 7 May 2022; Accepted 6 July 2022
Veli VirmajokiAmara 1974Bell, 2009Groves, 2017
Previous PDFNext PDF
