This is the Enhanced Reader view. For maximum accessibility screen reader users should use the HTML format which is available on the article page for most content.
OutlineFigures (17)
1/18



Previous PDFNext PDF
Article start
Resource identifier interoperability among heterogeneous IoT platforms
Jahoon Koo ⇑, Young-Gab Kim ⇑
Department of Computer and Information Security, and Convergence Engineering for Intelligent Drone, Sejong University, Seoul, Republic of Korea
a r t i c l e i n f o
Article history:
Received 1 November 2021
Revised 3 April 2022
Accepted 4 May 2022
Available online 8 May 2022
Keywords:
Internet of Things
Interoperability
IoT platform
Resource identifier
Smart city
a b s t r a c t
Many standards, projects, and platforms are being developed as the Internet of Things (IoT) is adopted in
a wide range of fields. However, because each IoT platform is based on a different resource identifier (ID),
it is difficult to identify each device and use the service among heterogeneous IoT platforms. To solve this
problem, we propose an interoperability framework that includes an IoT resource name system (RNS)
based on analysis of the resource IDs (i.e., device ID and resource request formats) of five selected IoT
platforms: oneM2M, Oliot, Watson IoT, IoTivity, and FIWARE. The IoT RNS converts a specific resource
path into a resource request format for each platform. The converted resource path is shared among
IoT RNSs for each platform, and users can request services from other platforms using converted resource
paths. We also present an example of interoperability scenario among heterogeneous IoT platforms using
the proposed IoT RNS in a smart city. The scenario includes each stage, such as resource registration and
deletion, sharing mapping tables, converting resource addresses, and service requests. Furthermore, to
prove the aims of the proposed approach, we implemented the resource interoperability scenario
between oneM2M and FIWARE. In the experiments, resources can interwork in the two platforms
through resource path conversion. Based on the results, we performed a qualitative evaluation of the
IoT RNS with the current studies. In conclusion, our proposal overcomes the issues of building an existing
integrated platform or specific central ontology and duplicating resources inside the platform. In addi-
tion, we separate the functions of the root and local IoT RNSs to solve communication traffic and memory
capability issues.
Ó 2022 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of King Saud University. This is an open access
article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
1. Introduction
Internet of Things (IoT) technology is developing and expanding
in various fields such as smart homes, healthcare, smart cities,
logistics, and smart car. The international standard, ‘‘ISO/IEC
20924:2018 Information technology—Internet of Things (IoT)—
Vocabulary” (ISO/IEC, 2021), defines the IoT as the ‘‘infrastructure
of interconnected entities, people systems, and information
resources together with services that process and react to informa-
tion from the physical and virtual world.” In other words, the IoT is
hyper-connectivity among smart things, services, and humans to
provide useful and seamless services regardless of the types of net-
works, devices, and platforms and with minimum human involve-
ment. These technologies, related standards, projects, and
platforms are continuously being developed (Lee et al., 2021). In
particular, IoT platforms are an essential factor in providing inter-
operability because they support the network connection to vari-
ous devices (e.g., sensors and access points) and provide services
to users. According to the IoT Platform Companies Landscape &
Database 2020, the official number of IoT platform companies in
the open market is more than 620, up from 450 in 2017. For exam-
ple, many platforms (e.g., AllSeen Alliance AllJoyn, Apple HomeKit,
oneM2M, FIWARE, Google Cloud IoT, GS1 Oliot, IBM Watson IoT,
Microsoft Azure, and OCF IoTivity) are being developed to provide
various services. Therefore, interoperability, such as requesting
services and sharing resources among diverse IoT platforms, is
important, and it is an essential factor for building a real IoT envi-
ronment that provides seamless services regardless of the type of
IoT platform.
Platform interoperability is challenging to resolve due to vari-
ous issues such as support for diverse protocols, device discovery,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jksuci.2022.05.003
1319-1578/Ó 2022 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of King Saud University.
This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
⇑ Corresponding authors at: Department of Computer and Information Security,
and Convergence Engineering for Intelligent Drone, Sejong University, Seoul 05006,
Republic of Korea.
E-mail addresses: sigmao91@sju.ac.kr (J. Koo), alwaysgabi@sejong.ac.kr (Y.-G.
Kim).
Peer review under responsibility of King Saud University.
Production and hosting by Elsevier
Journal of King Saud University — Computer and Information Sciences 34 (2022) 4191—4208
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Journal of King Saud University —
Computer and Information Sciences
j o u r n a l h o m e p a g e : w w w . s c i e n c e d i r e c t . c o m
Jahoon KooYoung-Gab KimISO/IEC, 2021Lee et al., 2021
well-defined semantic management, and processing of data for-
mats in heterogeneous platforms. However, current diverse plat-
forms and related standards make it difficult to achieve
interoperability and collaboration among heterogeneous IoT plat-
forms. Each IoT platform has been developed using a specific and
unique device identifier and resource-request format. These
unique formats cause difficulty in identifying each resource among
heterogeneous IoT platforms. For example, as depicted in Fig. 1,
suppose that four IoT platforms (i.e., oneM2M, Watson IoT,
FIWARE, and IoTivity) are connected to the same middleware. It
will cause interoperability issues in resource discovery and
resource requests due to the differences in resource discovery
and request format of each platform.
OneM2M users check the available services using the resource
discovery provided by oneM2M, but because resource discovery
is based on identifiers unique to each platform, resources of
heterogeneous IoT platforms are not discovered. In addition, even
if a oneM2M user sends a request in the oneM2M format, the
meaning of the request and the included resource identifier cannot
be understood because each platform uses a different identifier
and request format. Therefore, even if multiple platform resources
are connected to the same middleware, the user is provided with
only limited services. To solve these resource interoperability
issues, existing research focuses mainly on integrating the ontol-
ogy of each platform or duplicating the resources of other plat-
forms on the corresponding platform. Furthermore, the existing
interoperability schemes need to construct specific ontologies
(Thiéblin et al., 2020; Ranpara and Kumbharana, 2021) and con-
sume a significant amount of memory (Li et al., 2019).
Therefore, to overcome the limitations of the existing
approaches, we propose an IoT resource name system (RNS), which
focuses on mapping and converting the format of a resource iden-
tifier (ID) among diverse IoT platforms. We concentrate on con-
verting resource paths (e.g., device ID, resource-request format)
used in a specific IoT platform to the target IoT platform, but data
transmission issues (e.g., data format, supported network proto-
cols) are not addressed. Koo et al. (Koo and Kim, 2017; Koo et al.,
2019; Koo and Kim, 2021) proposed an architecture for semantic
interoperability and implemented a simple testbed for interoper-
ability based on resource path conversion by mapping the IDs in
heterogeneous IoT platforms. We use this approach as the initial
model for the current study. In particular, we clearly distinguish
and describe procedures such as creating, deleting, and converting
resources for interoperability and service requests in a smart city.
The proposed IoT RNS analyzes and converts resource IDs into the
desired request formats, including reconfiguring requests among
heterogeneous IoT platforms as appropriate for the requested
resources. The contributions of this paper include the following:
(1) The proposed IoT RNS focuses on the resource IDs of the IoT
platforms. We analyzed and mapped the format of resource
IDs and service requests used by five representative IoT plat-
forms. The IoT RNS uses the mapped information to convert
the resource IDs.
(2) We also propose a conceptual framework and architecture to
convert resource IDs among heterogeneous IoT platforms.
The resource registration, discovery, path conversion, and
service request processes are proposed, and examples of
each step are presented through resource interoperability
scenarios in a smart city.
(3) Furthermore, to prove the aims of the proposed approach,
we created an implementation scenario for two IoT plat-
forms (i.e., oneM2M and FIWARE). Experimental results
indicate that resources can interwork in the two platforms
through resource path conversion. Based on the results, we
performed a qualitative evaluation of our proposal with
the current studies.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2
analyzes background knowledge and summarizes related works
regarding interoperability in IoT environments. Section 3 proposes
an IoT RNS architecture, including a scenario in the smart city envi-
ronment. Section 4 implements an interoperability scenario of our
proposal. Section 5 explains the comparative evaluation and dis-
cusses the limitations. Finally, Section 6 summarizes this study
as a conclusion and future work.
2. Background and related work
Section 2.1 describes a taxonomy for interoperability in the IoT
environment. Section 2.2 compares resource IDs (i.e., the resource
request format and the device ID) for the five selected IoT plat-
forms. Section 2.3 describes and summarizes IoT interoperability
studies.
2.1. Taxonomy for interoperability in the IoT environments
The IoT environment can be divided into diverse layers such as
device, network, middleware, and application, as shown in Fig. 2.
Each layer includes various elements. For example, the device layer
includes heterogeneous sensors and actuators such as drones,
surveillance cameras, and smart cars in different domains used in
Fig. 1. Problems in resource discovery and resource request.
J. Koo and Young-Gab Kim Journal of King Saud University – Computer and Information Sciences 34 (2022) 4191–4208
4192
Fig. 1Thiéblin et al., 2020Ranpara and Kumbharana, 2021Li et al., 2019Koo and Kim, 2017Koo et al.,2019Koo and Kim, 2021Fig. 2
Previous PDFNext PDF
