This is the Enhanced Reader view. For maximum accessibility screen reader users should use the HTML format which is available on the article page for most content.
OutlineFigures (5)
2/20



Article start
Journal Pre-proof
Kriper: A blockchain network with permissioned storage
María Isabel Rojo Rivas, Daniel Díaz-Sánchez, Florina Almenarez,
Andrés Marín-Lopez
PII: S0167-739X(22)00267-9
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.future.2022.08.006
Reference: FUTURE 6571
To appear in: Future Generation Computer Systems
Received date : 9 September 2021
Revised date : 15 July 2022
Accepted date : 6 August 2022
Please cite this article as: M.I.R. Rivas, D. Díaz-Sánchez, F. Almenarez et al., Kriper: A blockchain
network with permissioned storage, Future Generation Computer Systems (2022), doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.future.2022.08.006.
This is a PDF file of an article that has undergone enhancements after acceptance, such as the
addition of a cover page and metadata, and formatting for readability, but it is not yet the definitive
version of record. This version will undergo additional copyediting, typesetting and review before it
is published in its final form, but we are providing this version to give early visibility of the article.
Please note that, during the production process, errors may be discovered which could affect the
content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
© 2022 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC
BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
María Isabel Rojo RivasDaniel Díaz-SánchezFlorina AlmenarezAndrés Marín-Lopez
Journal Pre-proof
Journal Pre-proofKriper: a blockchain network with permissioned storage
María Isabel Rojo Rivasa, Daniel Díaz-Sáncheza, Florina Almenareza, Andrés Marín-Lopeza
aTelematic Engineering Department, Carlos 3rd University of Madrid, Avda. de la Universidad 30, Leganés, 28911, Madrid, Spain
Abstract
Blockchain has been a revolution in the past few years. Beyond the new currencies that were created around different incarnations
of the blockchain concept, there are many other contributions that provide interesting services as a data linked structure using a
decentralized network that provide a high level of security. Companies have developed many projects to incorporate blockchain
into their business logic pursuing to incorporate other related services as persistence of large volumes of data, privacy or anonymity
of transactions, distributed data processing, security (confidentiality, integrity, and availability), document management or micro
messages in real time. Nevertheless, as it will be discussed in this article, current blockchains do not meet the needs of companies
in many aspects, leading to a scarce or superficial adoption. This article introduces Kriper, a blockchain that aims at meeting
corporate world needs by responding with a community-based, open blockchain that may also be segregated and private for certain
uses whereas it provides a permissioned distributed storage and micro message lightweight services.
Keywords:
blockchain, distributed storage, permissioned storage, access control, privacy, confidentiality
PACS: 0000, 1111
2000 MSC: 0000, 1111
1. Introduction
Shatoshi Nakamoto designed a new storage concept data
processing. Bitcoin [1] was conceived as an anonymous cur-
rency for legal transactions that were a mere anecdote at the
beginning, but it did succeed to perform legal service transfers
for a time, to end up lately as an investor safe haven. From
a technical point of view, its most interesting contribution has
been the Blockchain concept [2] with its data linked, decentral-
ized and supported by a community that also provided a high
level of security through consensus [3].
Since a few years ago, there are many projects and com-
panies that create applications around the blockchain concept
with different approaches [4][5] such as traceability and man-
agement of IoT or SmartContracts ecosystems to control multi-
ples aspects of transactions. Others have focused on providing
an alternative to traditional currencies as a substitute to current
transactions such as [6][7]. However, the least successful ap-
proach is the one adapted to the world of business, where it
is intended to allow companies to have blockchain services as
if they were public or private distributed databases, something
that Ethereum tried to do in the private area, with its private
network [8].
Among the worth mentioning benefits that a company could
find in blockchain, could be the treatment or persistence of
large volumes of data, privacy or anonymity, distribution of data
treatment, security (confidentiality, integrity and availability),
document management, micro messages in real time. In addi-
tion, the concept of a versatile public-private-mixed blockchain
is a very useful concept for the world of business [9].
Unfortunately, there is currently no solution that meets all
storage needs and transaction management that a corporate en-
vironment may need in their activity.
However, there are initiatives in which companies partially
use blockchain technology in their projects. In some cases,
they include small transactions of their business logic in the
blockchain, such as an audit or very limited use for traceability
reasons [10]. Others consist of combining different corporate
data sources with blockchain within the same application so
that the blockchain may work as an audit tool, some examples
are analysed in 2.
These types of data source integrations do not use the blockchain
completely for data storage, so the solutions lose their distribu-
tion and resilient custody characteristics of their own data. In
general, persistent information becomes just pointers to corpo-
rate data, leaving aside features such as consensus, decentral-
ization, and security.
This article introduces Kriper, a blockchain that aims at
meeting corporate world needs by responding with a community-
based, open blockchain that may also be segregated and private
for certain uses. Furthermore, Kriper devotes a storage space
for both big files and messages containing only a few charac-
ters for networks such as IoT or lightweight messaging service.
Kriper offers security and flexibility for any type of use and
is different from other blockchains as analysed in 2. Basically,
the proofs of work (PoW) limiting DoS attacks and maintain-
ing the security in traditional blockchains are substituted, in the
case of Kriper, by two different but interlocking proofs that in-
volve both work or computing power that involve (PoW) as
proof of space management (PoSt), which allows to increase
Preprint submitted to Future Generation Computer Systems July 15, 2022
[1][2][3][8][9][10]
Journal Pre-proof
Journal Pre-proofsecurity and speed. In addition, a different management of the
cost of using the network is carried out (GAS) so that it is more
sustainable, and so as not to pay awards on every proof (PoW
or PoS) or pay any use of the network.
Kriper aims at a universal and free use of the network, but
maintaining rewards to those who maintain the network. Kriper
introduces different levels of security that allow to catalogue,
process and store information in a different way; it allows to
save files of different sizes, process real-time information, gen-
erate alerts, process contracts, events, certificates. . .
This paper explains how Kriper should be defined after re-
viewing different existing blockchains and their applicability in
professional settings in 2. The design paragraph contained in
3provides a detail of Kriper blockchain’s proposal and its de-
sign in two layers. It also discusses the distribution of blocks
in Kriper and which data are kept to achieve a secure and reli-
able operation. 4, provides the operating details of typical use
cases. To prove Kriper’s viability, a proof of concept has been
developed and several proofs have been carried out in different
environments in 5 and, finally, this paper ends with the conclu-
sions obtained from this study in 6.
2. Related Work
Several blockchains are analysed with relevant contributions
at a technological level such as IOTA [11], Ethereum [12, 13],
Bitcoin[1], Monero[7], DataCoin[14] and FileCoin [15].
A blockchain is an organized succession of blocks of data
with certain attributes. The amount of information stored in a
blockchain such as Bitcoin or Ethereum is quite limited, making
it possible to store and/or verify a certain logic in the blockchain
by means of Smart Contracts in the case of Ethereum. Block-
hains such as DataCoin [14], allow for storing also small files
such a torrent files and certificates. The main problem at Data-
Coin is the need to replicate big quantity of data in every node
(since all of them should have a copy of the blockchain).
Filecoin [15] is a blockchain using Interplanetary File Sys-
tem (IPFS) to store any kind of information. Routing of files
is done using the blockchain, while storage is done using IPFS,
thus the blockchain is separated from files, since they are dele-
gated in the P2P IPFS model network.
In any case, the abovementioned blockchains, except for
FileCoin, do not handle large amounts of data. Kriper, as well
as FileCoin, do not store the contents in the blockchain, but
permits and access rules; the big difference is that the commu-
nity maintaining Kriper also maintains the files that are withat
the Storage Layer in a separate, anonymous and secure manner.
In this way, the Kriper network has full control of files at any
time, and may enable concepts such as private networks with
management, access or payments per use of files, among other
types of uses that Kriper may offer, since they have the control
of both layers (blockchain processing and file storage).
Other networks such as IOTA [11] do not use a sequence of
interlocking blocks such as Bitcoin or Ethereum, in which there
is a chronology in the sequence. IOTA uses a structure called
Tangle, which consists of a Directed Acyclic Graph(DaG). As
in the case of Ethereum, it also has Smart Contracts, though still
in an Alpha phase. IOTA may store any information in Tangle,
its persistence is not yet guaranteed since nodes may eliminate
data locally.
Kriper allows for storing any kind of file, regardless their
size or type. The two-layer approach allows for this total flex-
ibility when storing files and keeping them replicated within
the blockchain with no need to be in every node, whether they
are necessarily public or that the performance of the blockchain
network is penalized for handling an excessively large data struc-
ture.
Blockchain networks use Proof of Work (PoW) to generate
a set of data which are difficult to generate in terms of compu-
tational cost, but easy to verify. Blockchain grows to the extent
that participating miners generate new blocks which contain the
unverified transactions, as well as a hash as an identifier of the
previous block. The generation and validation of a block in-
volves a proof of work so complex that, together with the link
to the previous block, they ensure the irreversibility and im-
mutability of transactions.
Once the transactions have been verified and the PoW has
been demonstrated for a new block, the miner that creates that
block evaluates with other miners the inclusion of the created
block. Since 2012, the replacement of PoW mechanisms by
other ones more environmentally-friendly (since less energy is
required to maintain the network) [16] known as Proof of Stake
(PoS) in which the coin holders can verify transactions and be
rewarded in turn. The more coins a participant has, the more
possibilities to verify the transactions and, therefore, to get a
reward. Thus, it makes sense that holders of cryptocurrencies
are the most interested ones in the survival of the network. The
most relevant PoW examples are HashCash [17] used in Bitcoin
as well as Ethash used in Ethereum [13].
IOTA has no miners and transactions are free. To do this,
each participant must verify two previous transactions (and per-
form a PoW to avoid SPAM). At each node of the Tangle, there
may be several transactions or sites. Every verification lacks
the consensus that other blockhains demand.
Kripper introduces a new concept in addition to PoW and
PoS called Proof of Storage (PoSt) in which those participants
who lend their extra storage space to the network are rewarded.
Most blockchains demand a reward to materialize a transac-
tion on the blockchain. In Bitcoin it is called Bitcoin Average
Transaction Fee, which is quoted in dollars when a transaction
is processed and verified by a miner. This rate varies over time.
In Ethereum, the concept of GAS is used, which is the nec-
essary rate to perform a successful transaction. FileCoin use
the same GAS concept, making a different calculation by de-
stroying part of the collection and distributing the remaining
among the miners. Similarly, Monero and others calculate the
cost in their own currency, in some cases depending on the size
of the transaction (in those cases where the transactions may
vary) and others depending on the evolution of the value of the
currency over time. IOTA does not require a payment to mate-
rialize a transaction, but it does require a PoW to verify other
transactions, so the cost exists, but is distributed collaboratively
as there is no such thing as a miner.
2
[11][12, 13][1][7][14][15][14][15][11][16][17][13]
Journal Pre-proof
Journal Pre-proofWith regard to blockchain proposals and their adaptability
to corporate environments, the first deficiency detected when
applying any of the blockchains to a company, is the ineffi-
ciency when dealing with large-volume files.
As mentioned, since Ethereum, Bitcoin and Monero are lin-
ear coins (one block approved after another) they do not support
files in their blocks, if so, the size of the blockchain would grow
enormously, limiting the number of miners to those with suffi-
cient storage space and amounts of RAM too high to be able
to mine new data blocks. Therefore, working with these vol-
umes of data would enormously slow down the mining and the
approval of new blocks until it could be no longer sustainable.
DataCoin, on the other hand, does not allow the storage
of large volumes of data, and has the same problem, since the
chain would grow indiscriminately. FileCoin uses a similar ap-
proach to Kriper using alternative storage, but lacks the required
permissions and compartmentalisation for corporate informa-
tion storage since FileCoin only saves an identifier of the file to
be uploaded, while the storage of this file is delegated to the P2P
IRPF network, and leaves the control of the FileCoin network
itself and cannot reward the donors of part of their resources to
the network.
Another dimension of comparison is speed. In a corporate
environment, it is necessary to have speed available to persist
short messages for business use cases that work with micro
messages, IoT elements and even software traces for Security
Operation Centers (SOCs) and logs, among others. In this case,
IOTA could be the only blockchain with enough agility to sat-
isfy the requirement by using a DaG instead of a blockchain.
Another necessary characteristic for a company is the com-
partmentalization of information. There are lots of use cases
in which the content persisted through a blockchain cannot be
shared publicly due to business secrecy and privacy of clients
and the company itself, among others. This would be a require-
ment that only Kriper could meet since, as already mentioned,
FileCoin (the only one that could store large volumes of files)
sends its data to the external IRPF network so it cannot ensure
privacy and data management.
Ethereum allows the creation of your own blockchains iso-
lated from the rest of the community by creating a closed silo.
Although in many cases this may be desirable, the redundancy
and strength provided by a public blockchain would be lost.
IOTA, like Ethereum, also allows to have a parallel network,
but, as soon as it finds connectivity, it will send that private net-
work to the public network for them to join, thus exposing all
its information. Monero and Bitcoin are completely public so
they were not covering the case.
Blockchain has other qualities that have been successfully
introduced in business environments, especially as an alterna-
tive currency, since it is the currency with the largest commu-
nity and, the more miners support a currency, the greater se-
curity it will have as there are many more machines validating
blocks.
Another alternative on the market would be Hyperledger
Fabric [18], IBM’s private and modular blockchain. It is a
Blockchain designed to be installed and used in private envi-
ronments and with different modules of use. Again, it would
not cover all corporate use cases since the information must be
linked to a file system by means of a reference (same model
as FileCoin) and there would be no redundancy of data, since
they are stored on private servers. Therefore, since there are
no miners from a larger network supporting it, its security and
resilience is limited to the access control imposed by the pri-
vate network to the data and the number of nodes in the private
network, respectively.
Certainly, there was no model in the market designed for
a general corporate use, but it was designed either for market
or use niches, or rather for the community in the form of cryp-
tocurrency (see table 1).
Kriper solves this problem by creating a blockchain bearing
the strength of a public blockchain, while allowing the storage
of any type of data, compartmentalizing the information and
protecting it with a permission scheme more suitable for the
business world.
3. Kriper Design
This section presents Kriper’s design by understanding its
two-layer model, the different agents that operate in it, and how
data is controlled and linked.
3.1. Entities in Kriper
On other blockchains, users can be traceable [19] [20]. For
example, in Bitcoin, a miner must change both the "reward-
address" (address where he/she is rewarded after finding a new
block) and the counter used in HashCash so as not to be easily
detectable or traceable by using repeatedly the same "wallet".
Unlike Bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies, users in Kriper
are identified by a hash calculated using Leighton-Micali Sig-
natures (LMS) [21] that combine a one-time signature scheme
with a tree structure, allowing for the creation of new tree nodes
and therefore allowing for new signatures, using the hash func-
tion and concatenations. In this way, several identifiers per user
are allowed, so that their movements or contributions are not
easily traceable. On the other hand, this signature scheme is re-
sistant to quantum computing, providing greater security to the
system as discussed in section 3.2.
In Kriper there are several types of entities that participate
by maintaining or using the network:
• Miners: Those machines that are part of the Kriper net-
work with computational capabilities that offer that ca-
pacity to maintain the network. These entities are in charge
of processing the blocks of the blockchain and validat-
ing others proposed by other miners. The mining process
consists of validating the blocks with a proof of work of a
very low complexity since the purpose is that data trans-
fers are executed and processed as discussed in section
3.5.1. In the case of Kriper, a mining node will always
validate two blocks to approve one of them; therefore,
each block will always be linked with at least two other
blocks.
3
[18][21]
