 ABSTRACT

The discharged of lead and cadmium above maximum permissible limits into surface water and environment without any pre-treatment methods has caused severe heath challenges to humanity. In other to minimize the reoccurrence, this research aim to ascertain biosorption capacity of bamboo stem biomass to remove lead and cadmium from aqueous solution. Batch experiment and data evaluation under optimum removal conditions (such as pH, contact time, temperature, biosorbent dosage, initial heavy metal concentration) were determined. Maximum optimum removal was observed for both metal ions at pH 5, 90 min contact time, 298K temperature with 50 ppm of initial concentration for 95.92 and 80.98% removal for lead and cadmium. Lead revealed better results at all concentrations for bamboo stem biomass with increase in percentage removal as concentration of heavy metal increases. Kinetics and isotherms models were applied and this shows that kinetic models are described and fitted well with pseudo-second order reaction while adsorption isotherm model supported Freundlich model with high R2 values. Thermodynamically, biosorption of lead and cadmium was exothermic and lead was greater than cadmium in the order of spontaneity and entropy. From these results, it can be concluded that bamboo stem biomass has been shown to be productive in removal of heavy metals from aqueous solution.

Key words: Biosorption, bamboo stem biomass, heavy metals, kinetics, isotherms, thermodynamics.

 


 INTRODUCTION

The world we live in today is being threatened by extinction due to the activities of mankind  in  their  desire to recondition the environment for their conduct. Such activities include  agricultural  practices,  mining,  military, and wastes from research activities, construction works and industrial activities. Prominent amongst the effects of these activities is pollution of air, water, and land. Environmental pollution has posed a serious concern and challenging problem due to rapid population and diverse progress in societies, sciences, technologies, and industries. The industrial effluent containing both inorganic and organic toxic compounds which are discharged into surface water majorly stream and river without any pre-treatment techniques have seriously affected biodiversity, ecosystem functioning and natural activities of aquatic system (Martín-González et al., 2014; Mohammed et al., 2014).

According to Comprehensive Environmental Response Compensation and Liability Act, USA, the maximum permissible limit of heavy metals concentrations in aqueous medium is as follows, Cr-0.01 mg/L, Ar-0.01 mg/L, Cd-0.05 mg/L, Hg-0.002 mg/L, Pb-0.015 mg/L, and Ag-0.05 mg/L, respectively (Jaishankar et al., 2014). If the heavy metal concentration exceeds those recommended permissible limits, it can be major contribution to many life threatening diseases. In human, Pb may cause severe damage to kidney, brain, liver, reproductive and nervous systems (Babarinde et al., 2016; WHO 2016), as well as oxidative stress and impaired respiratory infections (Roy et al., 2015; Jurdziak et al, 2015) whereas Cd in human and other aquatic animal cause behavioral alterations (Pan et al., 2017), immunity disruption (Wang et al., 2019), genotoxicity (Pereira et al., 2016) reproductive impairment, mortality, among other toxic effects (Hani et al., 2019; Krzykwa et al., 2019). Therefore, in order to protect the environment and human health, the removal of heavy metal ions from water is very important (Saad et al., 2016). This has led many researchers to develop various technological processes to remove contaminations levels caused by these heavy metals and bring them within permissible limits in the environment in terms of soil, food and water (Tóth et al., 2016) (Table1). Most of the industrial scale remediation techniques involving physical, chemical, and biological   methods   as   conventional  method  such  as chemical precipitation, ion exchange, reverse osmosis, adsorption, membrane separation, electro kinetics, coagulation, biosorption etc (Gautam et al., 2015) have been used as single techniques for heavy metal removal from soil, water and sediments and despite the huge contribution by the processes they still have some high level of disadvantages in terms of low efficiency, high operational cost, sludge production and failure at large scale implementation (Selvi et al., 2015), therefore in other to overcome these disadvantages, associate with these conventional methods and provide feasible alternatives that can help to increase the efficiency of heavy metals remediation as reported by many researchers in recent years (Mao et al., 2016; Selvi and Aruliah, 2018) which must have various advantages, there is need for effectiveness, eco-friendly, versatile, short duration, on-site adaptability, and large scale option, easy to set up etc (Mao et al., 2016). Owing to these outcomes, biological methods such as biosorption processes are gaining much popularity due to metal binding capacity of various biological materials and have been considered as novel, economic, efficient, and eco-friendly technology (He and Chen, 2014) treatment alternative for the removal of heavy metals from various environmental matrices generated from various industries. Biosorption can be defined as a simple metabolically passive physicochemical process involved in the binding of metals ions (biosorbate) to the surface of the biosorbent which is of biological origin (MrvÄiÄ‡ et al., 2012). This biological removal method include the use of microorganisms, plant derived materials, agriculture or industrial wastes, biopolymers, and so on. The biosorption process involves a solid phase (sorbed or biosorbent) and liquid phase (solvent, usually water containing a dissolved species to be sorbed). Because of higher affinity capacity of the sorbent materials for the sorbate species, the latter gets attracted and bounded through different mechanisms. The use of different low cost biosorbent materials have been employed in the treatment of wastewater to remove different types of heavy metals concentrations in many industries like food, mining, fertilizer, paper, pharmaceuticals, etc, and these biosorbent materials include industrial by-products (such as tea waste, sugar waste, antibiotic waste, paper mill waste, cement waste, etc), agricultural waste materials (such as rice husk, sugar cane bagasse, green coconut shell, peanut hull, barley straw, neem bark, cassava peeling, bamboo etc) and microbial biosorbent (algae biomass, bacteria biomass and fungi biomass). Algae biomass includes; Spirogyra sp, Enterobacter sp, Palmaria palmate, Oedogonium hatei etc; Bacteria biomass includes; bacillus cereus, E. coli, Pseudomonas putida, Arthrobacter sp, Rhizobium spp etc; Fungi biomass incudes; Pennicillum canescens, Aspergillus niger, Pleurotus oestreatus, Saccharomyces cerevisiae etc and also inorganic precursors (such as chitosan, red mud, clay, zeolites, blast furnance slag etc) (Bilal et al., 2013; Grassi et al., 2012) to mention a few. The literatures from past researchers have shown that basic and applied aspects of heavy metal biosorption by varieties of agricultural waste biomass have gained much popularity. Among all these agricultural waste biomass, bamboo still remain notable adsorbent for the removal of pollutants from polluted gaseous and liquid streams and is readily available in large quantities, is a cheap material, can be disposed without expensive regeneration process and highly effective capacity in removing heavy metals pollutants from any wastewater. Bamboo is a perennial woody grass, which belongs to the family Gramineae and subfamily Bambuseae (He et al., 2014). It is an evergreen, monocotyledonous (or non-woody) plant, which produces primary shoot without any later secondary growth (Kleinhenz et al., 2001). It is flexible, elastic and has a higher compressive and tensile strength due to ability to resist forces. According to their morphology, bamboos are broadly divided into monopodial (or running) bamboos with ‘leptomorph’ rhizome system and sympodial (clumping) bamboos with ‘pachymorph’ rhizome system. These differences in rhizome systems can be because of their adaptations to climate conditions to which the bamboos belong.

 



 

Cellulose, hemicelluloses and lignin are the three major chemical compositions of bamboo, and they are closely bonded together and associated in a complex structure (Li et al., 2014). They contribute to about 90% of the total bamboo mass. The minor components are pigments, tannins, protein, fat, pectin, ash and aqueous extracts. Others include resins, waxes and inorganic salts. These constituents play a vital important role in physiological activity of bamboo, and they are found in cell cavity or special organelles (Khalil et al., 2012). The chemical composition of bamboo is known to be similar to that of wood, but bamboo has a higher content of minor components compared with wood (Nurul et al., 2016), and all other agricultural waste materials make bamboo biomass to have high sorption capacity for removal of heavy metals pollutants when compared to other agricultural biosorbent  materials.  From  other  studies,  it has been reported that the chemical composition of bamboo fibre was 73% cellulose, 12.49% hemi cellulose, 10.15% lignin, 3.16% aqueous extract, and 0.37% pectin which was very high when compared to all other agricultural fibers (Li et al., 2010). From different previous researches using other agricultural waste, the biosorption capacities of bamboo have been used for the removal of heavy metals. This study assesses the capabilities of two common plants in tropical wetlands; Raffia bambusa and Bambusa vulgaris to remove Cu2+, Pb2+, Ni2+ and Cd2+ from wastewater. The R. bambusa appeared to have more pronounced groups than B. vulgaris in terms of removal capacity by showing maximum sorption of 95% Cu and Pb but have lower maximum sorption capacity of about 40% for Cd and Ni by biomass derived from roots of these plants (Ofori-Sarpong et al., 2016).

Furthermore, research have shown that biosorption of Lead (II) from aqueous solution and industrial effluent by using leaves of Araucaria cookie revealed batch studies under optimum parameters were to evaluate biosorption efficiency to remove Lead (II) from wastewater and reached a maximum sorption removal of 98.52%. Isotherms and kinetic models were applied and this shows that kinetic models are described and fitted well with Pseudo-second order reaction. The model and experimental data was favourable in the removal of Lead (II) in the industrial waste water and leaves of Araucaria cookie be used as low cost biosorbent (Deepa et al., 2014). In addition, the potential and feasibility of compost and biogas residues have been used for the biosorption and removal of Pb from contaminated water using a batch experiment to explore at equilibrium state using adsorption isotherm and kinetic model shows a greater sorption capacity and removal of 65-85% of Pb using compost residue compared to 41-69% removal using biogas residues. It concluded that compost residue was more porous and had greater surface area potentials than biogas residue for the removal of heavy metals from aqueous solution (Shah et al., 2018). Also, it has been described that adsorption capacity of bamboo stem activated carbon was used to remove Pb2+ from aqueous solution showing the maximum sorption capacity at lower pH, and bamboo activated carbon revealed better results at lower metal concentration and high solution temperature. Isotherm model supported multilayer adsorption of Pb2+ on bamboo activated carbon and thermodynamic parameter revealed negative free energy, positive entropy and enthalpy as spontaneous and endothermic nature of adsorption process using activated bamboo stem (Masood et al., 2015). The aim of this study is to evaluate biosorption of Pb2+ and Cd2+ ions from aqueous phase by bamboo stem biomass. Batch experiment and data evaluation under optimum removal conditions (such as pH, contact time, temperature, biosorbent dosage, initial heavy metal concentration and metal recovery) were determined. Various kinetics and equilibrium model were applied to describe the biosorption behavior of bamboo stem biomass.

 

 


 MATERIALS AND METHODS

Aqueous solutions of cadmium and lead were prepared from cadmium chloride and lead (II) trioxonitrate (V) respectively. Different experimental solutions were prepared by diluting the stock solution to the required concentration using distilled water. The pH of the systems was kept constant using 0.1 M HNO3 and 0.1 M NaOH. The concentrations of metals were determined with Atomic Absorption Spectrometer (Bulk 210VGP).

Preparation of bamboo stems biomass

A big bamboo stem (B. vulgaris) was collected from the bush at Iloko-Ijesha, Oriade Local Government, Osun State; Nigeria. It was allowed to dry by making it spend several days in the sun. It was later cut into bits and pieces by a mechanical cutter and taken to the mechanical grinder for grinding. The powdery substance was sieved using the 75 µ mesh size sieve, therefore the particle size was between 0-74 µ and the sieved sample was kept inside a polythene bag and stored in a dry place.

Batch adsorption studies

The adsorption highlights of the biosorbent bamboo stem biomass were researched as a component of pH, initial heavy metal concentration, biosorbent portion, contact time and temperature. The equilibrium and kinetics were obtained from batch experiments; 1 g of the bamboo stem biomass was weighed into reaction vessels containing 100 ml of 50 ppm each cadmium and lead solution of a particular pH (1–8) mixed together and agitated for six hours. The adsorbents were filtered into clean sample bottles and taken for metal analysis. The final pH of the solution was measured with a pH meter and the metal concentration in each sample was measured using an Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometer (AAS). The effect of sorbent resident time  was  monitored  by  allowing  1 g  of  bamboo stem biomass to interact with 100 ml each of 50 ppm metal solutions at the optimum pH, room temperature and shaken for different time. The adsorbents were filtered into clean sample bottles and taken for metal analysis. The biomass dosage on the biosorption was studied using different masses of bamboo stem biomass ranging from 0.25, 0.5, 1.0, 1.5 and 2.0 g that were placed in 100 ml of 50 ppm of each Cadmium and Lead solutions at pH 5 and room temperature. The mixture was shaken for 90 min, filtered and filtrate collected for metal analysis using Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometer. On the basis of data obtained from resident time study, applicable sorption kinetics was determined using the Lagergren pseudo first order and pseudo second order kinetic models and Elovich model. Recovery of bound metals unto bamboo stem biomass was carried out using 0.05, 0.1, 0.5 and 1.0 M HCl solution. After each experiment, the mixtures were shaken for 90 min, filtered and filtrates collected for metal analysis.

 


 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Impact of pH on the adsorption of Lead (II) and Cadmium (II) ions

Several researchers have reported that biosorption capacity of heavy metals in wastewater depend on pH of the solution (Demirbas, 2008; Johnson et al., 2008; Ioannidou and Zabaniotou, 2007). Therefore, the pH at which the optimum sorption of metal ions by bamboo stems biomass is important at solid- liquid interphase. According to (Ngah et al., 2008; O’Connell et al., 2008), adsorption increases as pH of the solution increases.

Presented in Figure 1 is the plot of pH profile study for cadmium and lead metals. Both metals showed an optimal binding pH of 5. Binding decreased after pH 5 due to the formation of soluble hydroxides. The effect of pH on adsorption capacity of lead and cadmium is shown in Figure 1. As the pH of the lead solution increased  from 1.0 to 8.0, the adsorption capacity of lead was changed, that is, it first increased from pH 1.0 to pH 5.0 and then decreased up to pH 8.0. The removal potency was highest at pH 5 with 93.60% representing the qe value 4.68 mg/g of the initial metal concentration removed. Lead study shows that 11.8 to 93.60% of the 50 ppm adsorption was attained from pH 1 to 5. The optimum pH value was 5 with 93.60% adsorption corresponding to 4.68 mg/g of metal removal.  It is in line with the work reported by (Reddy et al., 2012; Ahmad et al., 2015). The metal sorbed was higher for lead than cadmium even at the alkaline pH of 8. Cadmium ions showed similar trend as lead though the removal potency of the biomass for cadmium was slightly higher at pH 1 with 16.4% of the initial metal concentration, corresponding to 0.82 mg/g removed. Also, slightly higher amount of 0.865 mg/g corresponding to 17.3% was sorbed at pH 2. Subsequently, the removal efficiency was lower at every pH with 79.45%, corresponding to 3.9725 mg/g removed at pH 5 which remained the optimum pH. At low pH values, the adsorption sites are protonated thereby reducing metal ion that can be adsorbed (Henryk et al., 2016).

 



 

Effect of contact time on the adsorption of Lead (II) and Cadmium (II) ions

Effect of contact time on adsorption was studied and the results are shown in Figure 2. This result indicated that metal ions removal was increased with an increase in contact time before equilibrium was reached (Zafar et al., 2007; Yin et al., 1999). Other parameters such as dose of adsorbent  and  pH  of  solution  were  kept constant. The  effect of contact time for 100 ml of 50 ppm of cadmium and lead showed that both metals had fairly high adsorption in the first fifteen minutes with 94.00% corresponding to 4.6975 mg/g of lead and 41.2% corresponding to 2.06 mg/g of cadmium sorbed. Thereafter, removal increases and at 90 min, 77.2% corresponding to 3.86 mg/g of cadmium and 97.38% corresponding to 4.8429 mg/g of lead had been sorbed and that was the optimum. Sorption subsequently decreased and at 300 min, sorption was 3.65 mg/g and 4.7005 mg/g respectively for both cadmium and lead. After this equilibrium period, the amount of metal adsorbed did not change significantly with time. The fast adsorption at the initial stage was probably due to availability of sufficient number of vacant sites on the surface of the adsorbent. The underlying increment in metal expulsion was likely because of extra-cell authoritative. The pace of metal evacuation was higher until when harmony was reached because of a bigger surface zone of the adsorbent being accessible for the adsorption of the metals. It is additionally pertinent to bring up that, since dynamic sorption destinations in a framework have a fixed number and every dynamic site can adsorb just one of every monolayer, the metal take-up by the sorbent surface will be quick at first, backing off as the challenge for diminishing accessibility of dynamic locales increases by the metal particles staying in arrangement.

 



 

Effect of adsorbent dosage on the adsorption of Lead (II) and Cadmium (II) ions

The effects of variation in bamboo stem biomass  dosage on the amount of metals sorbed are shown in Figure 3 for cadmium and lead respectively. The adsorption of metals was studied at various adsorbent dosages of 0.25, 0.5, 1.0, 1.5 and 2.0 g with each dissolved in 100 ml of 50 ppm metal solutions. Adsorbent provides binding sites for the sorption of metal ions, and hence its concentration strongly affects the sorption of metal ions from the solution (Reddy et al., 2012; Stephen and Stilonana, 2004).. The amount of adsorbent used for the treatment studies is an important parameter, which determines the potential of adsorbent to remove metal ions at a given initial concentration.  Kanamadi et al., (2006) made a similar submission in a technical report on the biosorption of heavy metals by a low cost adsorbent. The percentage lead removed depends on the adsorbent dosage due to adsorption surface area. The percentage metal sorbed increases with increase in biosorbent dose for the heavy metals. Cadmium showed the percentage metal bound at 0.25 g biomass dose was 73.4% and increased to about 95.4% at 2.0 g biomass dose. Lead showed a similar trend with 87.6% at 0.25 g to 96% at 2.0 g. Generally, sorption did not increase significantly with increase in biomass dose beyond 1.5 g which makes the use of biomass dose beyond the amount unnecessary for that concentration. This is consistent with some work which suggested that after a particular dosage level, adsorption is not significant with increase in dosage and may even decrease (Liping et al., 2007). Similar result was reported by (Ghorbani et al., 2012).  At low biosorbent dose, all types of sites are entirely exposed and the adsorption on the surface is saturated faster, showing a higher qe value. But at higher adsorbent dose, the availability of higher energy  sites  decreases  with  a  larger  fraction  of lower energy sites occupied, resulting in a lower qe value (Aksu 2001). The biosorption capacity of compost per gram reduces as its biomass increases might be due to partial aggregation of biomass, which usually occurs at greater biomass and this phenomenon decreases access of metal ions to active sites for sorption (Ajmal et al., 1998; Gueu et al., 2007).

 



 

Temperature effect on the adsorption of Lead (ii) and Cadmium (ii) ions

Temperature is another significant physicochemical parameter as it changes the adsorption limit of the adsorbent. The impact of temperature on the balance take-up of cadmium and lead particles was researched at different temperatures of 298K, 308K, 318K, 328K, and 338K separately and at 50 ppm.

Figure 4 is the temperature plots for both cadmium and lead individually. It has been accounted for that at a high temperature; the thickness of the limit layer diminishes because of the expanded inclination of the metal particle to escape from the biomass surface to the arrangement stage, which brings about abatement in adsorption as the temperature builds (Krishnan, 2002). Increasing temperature may bring down the powers of adsorption between the adsorbate and the adsorption destinations on the biomass surface causing a reduction in adsorption limit (Huang and Blankenship, 1984). This was confirmed in the investigation whereby the adsorption of cadmium and lead by the biomass decreased with increase in temperature. For cadmium at 50 ppm and room temperature (298K), the metal  absorbed per  gram of the biomass (qe) was 3.9 mg/g while 3.35 mg/g was sorbed at 338K. For lead, 4.76 mg/g was sorbed at room temperature as against 4.19 mg/g sorbed at 338K. Atef and Manasreh, (2009) presented a comparable report that adsorption limits expanded with diminishing temperature which showed that the adsorption procedure was exothermic.

 



 

Effect of metal ion concentration on the adsorption of Lead (II) and Cadmium (II) ions

Initial concentration has effect on biomass. Initial concentration of Cd (II) and Pb (II) were varied from 25 - 200 ppm and the quantity of biosorbent was kept constant at 1 g, pH 5 maintained with contact time 90 min. Figure 5 is a plot of qe (mg/g) against initial metal ion concentrations. Cadmium had maximum adsorption at 25 ppm with 80.98% corresponding to a qe (mg/g) of 2.0245 mg/g adsorbed, but the percentage metal bound decreases from 77.9 to 51.0% as the concentration progressed from 50 to 200 ppm. Lead biosorption decreases with increase in the initial metal ion concentration. Lead showed that removal was highest and 25 ppm with 95.92%, corresponding to a qe value of 2.398 mg/g .This is consistent with the reported works of some analysts. Adsorption efficiency reduced as the initial ion concentration increased (Ghorbani et al., 2012). From the result, the amount of Pb2+ ions removed was higher than Cd2+ ions by the biomass. This may be due to difference in their ionic radii. The size of ionic radius has effect on hydrolysis which lead to  sorption  removal.  The ionic radius of Pb2+ is 1.20 while that of Cd2+ is 0.97 (Banat et al., 2007).

 



 

Effect of metal recovery on the adsorption of Lead (ii) and Cadmium (ii) ions

Desorption was studied by treating biomass with various initial HCI concentrations of 0.05 M, 0.1 M and 0.5 M and 1.0 M respectively. Mineral acids have been found to be effective desorbents of Pb2+ and Cd2+ when bound to a biomass (Low, 1960). In acidic solution, the carboxyl, carbonyl or hydroxyl groups inside the biomass are protonated and do not attract metal ions; besides, protons replace the bound metal ions (Langmuir, 1916). The data obtained from this experiment are consistent with this observation. 89.5% of Cd2+ was desorbed at 0.05 M, and this increased to 92.3% Cd2+ at 0.1 M HCl concentration, which is the optimum, and fell to 81% at 1.00 M. while 88.63% Pb2+ was desorbed at 0.5 M HCl concentration and 81.86% at 1.0 M concentration of the acid. Higher concentration of the acid beyond 0.1 M in the case of Cd2+ and 0.50 M in Pb2+ was therefore unnecessary. The percentage metal ions recovery at various concentrations of HCI was illustrated in the bar charts shown in Figure 6.

 



 

Kinetics of Cadmium and Lead adsorption

In order to investigate the controlling mechanism of adsorption   processes   such   as   mass    transfer    and  chemical reaction, the Lagergren pseudo-first order and pseudo second order equations were applied to model the kinetics of Cadmium and Lead adsorption onto bamboo biomass in metals solution