This is the Enhanced Reader view. For maximum accessibility screen reader users should use the HTML format which is available on the article page for most content.
OutlineCited byFigures (1)
1/6



Previous PDFNext PDF
Article start
Melanoma to Vitiligo: The Melanocyte in Biology &
MedicineeJoint Montagna Symposium on the
Biology of Skin/PanAmerican Society for Pigment
Cell Research Annual Meeting
Sancy A. Leachman1,2, Thomas J. Hornyak3,4, Greg Barsh5,6, Boris C. Bastian7,8, Douglas E. Brash9,
James E. Cleaver8, Cynthia D. Cooper10, John A. D’Orazio11, Mayumi Fujita12,13, Sheri L. Holmen14,
Arup K. Indra1,2,15, Kenneth H. Kraemer16, I. Caroline Le Poole17,18, Roger S. Lo19,
Amanda W. Lund1,2,20,21, Prashiela Manga22, William J. Pavan23, Vijayasaradhi Setaluri24,
Clara E. Stemwedel1 and Molly F. Kulesz-Martin1,2,20
Journal of Investigative Dermatology (2020) 140, 269e274; doi:10.1016/j.jid.2019.03.1164
INTRODUCTION
Melanoma to Vitiligo: The Melanocyte
in Biology & Medicine generated and
amplified a growing understanding of
the scientific basis of and clinical and
pathologic relationship between mela-
noma, a by-product of uncontrolled
growth of melanocytes, and vitiligo, a
disorder of undesirable death of mela-
nocytes. This meeting, held October
17e22, 2018, at Salishan Resort on the
Oregon Coast, incorporated the full
spectrum of pigment cell biology and
chemistry, as well as the biological
underpinnings of clinical disease. Each
of seven sessions, incorporating session
keynote and established and junior
investigator talks, endeavored to (i)
present cutting-edge pigment cell
biology and/or chemistry; (ii)
emphasize the application of science to
melanoma, vitiligo, and other medical
disorders; (iii) bring together widely
divergent disciplines to enhance trans-
disciplinary discussion on these topics;
and (iv) support promising young in-
vestigators with an interest in this topic
area.
Pre-meeting patient symposium and
opening keynote
A pre-meeting Vitiligo and Melanoma
Patient Symposium and Opening Key-
note brought together patients with
vitiligo, melanoma, and xeroderma
pigmentosum (XP) to learn from one
another and share perspectives with
clinicians and researchers attending
the main scientific meeting. Through
this inspiring event, we created a
venue where patients and supporters
could share their thoughts about their
diseases, react to science, and have
their questions answered by experts in
the field. This special introduction
created a sense of urgency and rele-
vance for the scientific sessions that
followed.
With this unique audience, Michael
Shapiro (University of Utah, Salt Lake
City) shared the remarkable story of
how the pigmentation and physical
characteristics of pigeons have been
used to uncover important pigmenta-
tion genes, their functions, and utility as
a model system for better understand-
ing evolutionary genetics and diversity
of color. Not only do some of the same
genes that underlie color variation in
birds also regulate pigment diversity
1Department of Dermatology, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, Oregon; 2Knight Cancer Institute, Oregon Health & Science University,
Portland, Oregon; 3Research and Development Service, VA Maryland Health Care System, Baltimore, Maryland; 4Departments of Dermatology and
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland; 5HudsonAlpha Institute for Biotechnology,
Huntsville, Alabama; 6Department of Genetics, Stanford University, Stanford, California; 7Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, California; 8Department of Dermatology, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, California;
9Departments of Therapeutic Radiology and Dermatology and Yale Cancer Center, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut; 10School of
Molecular Biosciences and College of Arts and Sciences, Washington State University Vancouver, Vancouver, Washington; 11The Markey Cancer Center and
the Departments of Toxicology and Cancer Biology and Pediatrics, University of Kentucky College of Medicine, Lexington, Kentucky; 12Departments of
Dermatology and Immunology & Microbiology, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, Colorado; 13Denver VA Medical Center, Denver,
Colorado; 14Huntsman Cancer Institute and Departments of Oncological Sciences and Surgery, University of Utah Health Sciences Center, Salt Lake City,
Utah; 15Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, Linus Pauling Institute, and Molecular and Cellular Biology Program, Oregon State
University, Corvallis, Oregon; 16Laboratory of Cancer Biology and Genetics, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland;
17Oncology Research Institute, Loyola University Chicago, Maywood, Illinois; 18Departments of Dermatology and Microbiology and Immunology, Feinberg
School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois; 19Division of Dermatology, Department of Medicine, and Department of Molecular and
Medical Pharmacology, David Geffen School of Medicine, and Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles,
California; 20Department of Cell, Developmental & Cancer Biology, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, Oregon; 21Department of Molecular
Microbiology & Immunology, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, Oregon; 22Ronald O. Perelman Department of Dermatology and Department of
Cell Biology, New York University School of Medicine, New York, New York; 23Genetic Disease Research Branch, National Human Genome Research
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland; and 24Department of Dermatology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin
Correspondence: Molly Kulesz-Martin, Department of Dermatology, Oregon Health & Science University, 3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Rd., L468R, Portland,
Oregon 97239. E-mail: kuleszma@ohsu.edu
Abbreviations: MITF, microphthalmia-associated transcription factor; XP, xeroderma pigmentosum
Received 1 March 2019; revised 18 March 2019; accepted 19 March 2019; accepted manuscript published online 23 July 2019; corrected proof published
online 10 October 2019
ª 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier, Inc. on behalf of the Society for Investigative Dermatology. www.jidonline.org 269
MEETING REPORT
Sancy A. LeachmanThomas J. HornyakGreg BarshBoris C. BastianDouglas E. BrashJames E. CleaverCynthia D. CooperJohn A. D’OrazioMayumi FujitaSheri L. HolmenArup K. IndraKenneth H. KraemerI. Caroline Le PooleRoger S. LoAmanda W. LundPrashiela MangaWilliam J. PavanVijayasaradhi SetaluriClara E. StemwedelMolly F. Kulesz-Martin
and disease in humans, but also sur-
prising molecular links emerged be-
tween color patterning in pigeons and
vision defects in both pigeons and
humans (Boer et al., 2017; Domyan
et al., 2014; Vickrey et al., 2018).
Session 1: Animal models
In a fascinating convergence of disci-
plines leading to transdisciplinary dis-
cussion, Karen Osborn (Smithsonian
Institution, Washington, DC) presented
on the diversity of form and function in
ocean creatures that live in the mid-
water “Twilight Zone,” where light is so
scarce that everything looks dark to the
human eye (Bagge et al., 2016). Deep-
sea fish, such as viperfish, are super
black, absorbing >99.9% of light to
make them all but invisible. Using so-
phisticated microscopy, Osborn and
colleagues revealed that the secret to
being super black was not only black
pigment but also the arrangement of
pigment granules into complex orga-
nized structures that trapped virtually
all light.
Genetically engineered mouse
models and/or specialized cell lines
have enabled investigation of various
aspects of melanoma and vitiligo
pathogenesis and treatment. Helen
Michael (National Cancer Institute,
Bethesda, Maryland) presented her
work in the Glenn Merlino lab on the
use of DNA sequencing of UV-induced
melanomas in hepatocyte growth fac-
tor transgenic mice to identify a series
of genes that drive the pathogenesis of
these melanocytic lesions. Lively dis-
cussion followed on the potential in-
fluence of the dermis in this melanoma
model.
Catherine van Raamsdonk (Univer-
sity of British Columbia, Vancouver,
Canada) presented data on a novel
mouse model for uveal melanoma,
leptomeningeal melanoma, and blue
nevuselike melanoma. In the mouse,
mutant GNAQ, when expressed in the
melanocytic lineage, leads to marked
proliferation of melanocytes in the
uveal tract, leptomeninges, and dermal
melanocytic neoplasms recapitulating
the distribution of tumor with Gq
pathway mutations in the human.
Pivoting to a vitiligo model, Zhus-
sipbek Mukhatayev (Northwestern
University, Evanston, Illinois) described
an innovative approach to vitiligo
treatment based on regulatory T cells
targeted, through chimeric antigen re-
ceptor technology, to a molecule that is
upregulated in vitiligo skin. Preliminary
evidence suggested that these cells
act as immunosuppressive engines,
decreasing the expression of signature
cytokines and representing a promising
approach for suppression of vitiligo.
Session 2: Human model systems
Hensin Tsao (Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts), Margaret
Tucker (National Cancer Institute,
Bethesda, Maryland), and Kenneth
Kraemer (National Cancer Institute,
Bethesda, Maryland) described over 40
years of research into melanoma and
XP genetics and its direct impact on
patients. The spectrum of familial mel-
anoma has been expanded to include
familial atypical mole and melanoma
syndrome and the BAP1 tumor syn-
drome. Sequencing of large cohorts
identified association with mutations in
CDKN2A, CDK4, and EBF3. Detailed
study of XP patients revealed a 10,000-
fold increase in nonmelanoma skin
cancer and a 2,000-fold increase in
melanoma in patients under 20 years;
comparison of nonmelanoma skin
cancer and melanoma in these patients
showed differential anatomic site dis-
tributions and genetic mutational asso-
ciations relative to the general
population, suggesting differential
mechanisms of carcinogenesis.
Understanding the basic biology of
DNA damage repair and the phenotype
of patients with genetic repair syn-
dromes has opened multiple avenues
for cancer therapy with the goal of
improving chemotherapy for cases
where targeted therapy and immuno-
therapy are unavailable. Sarah Arron
(University of California, San Francisco)
discussed multiple compounds in clin-
ical development targeting ATM,
CHK1/2, and nucleotide excision
repair, which regulate the cell cycle
and allow repair of DNA damage.
A clinician-driven panel discussion
addressed recent developments in
sunscreen-based prevention of skin
cancer. Panelist John DiGiovanna (Na-
tional Cancer Institute, Bethesda,
Maryland) discussed sunscreens
causing death of coral reefs, whereas
Douglas Brash (Yale University, New
Haven, Connecticut) noted the
development of biodegradable bio-
adhesive nanoparticle sunscreens.
Poster session young investigator
talks. Supporting young investigators
fulfills a primary mission of both the
Montagna Symposium on the Biology of
Skin and the PanAmerican Society for
Pigment Cell Research. Young in-
vestigators, in dedicated short-talk ses-
sions, explored mouse models of basic
melanocyte biology, improvement of
treatment options for melanoma, and
clarification of the order and identity of
mutations acquired during melanoma-
genesis from phenotypically normal
cell(s) to metastatic status.
Two of these presentations highlighted
results from the use of CRISPR technol-
ogy. Corinne Rauck (University of Cin-
cinnati, Ohio) showed that excision of the
adhesion protein CEACAM1 decreased
tumor growth upon transplantation into
syngeneic and immunodeficient mice.
This suggests potential for targeting of
CEACAM1 with other immune check-
point antigens, including PD-1, PD-L1,
and CTLA-4, in advanced melanoma.
Isoforms of microphthalmia-associated
transcription factor (MITF) are mutated
in familial melanoma and Waardenburg
syndrome, and Jessica Flesher (University
of California, Irvine) pursued studies in
mice selectively lacking isoforms MITF-A
and -F. On the one hand, Mitf-Menull
mice lacked melanocytes in hair follicles
and choroid but had a normal retinal
pigment epithelium, whereas the skin and
eyes of the Mitf-Aenull mice developed
normally, indicating a functional redun-
dancy between MITF isoforms.
Noel Turner (Yale University, New Ha-
ven, Connecticut) used a congenic mouse
melanoma cell model (Meeth et al., 2016)
to discover that immune checkpoint in-
hibitors impede growth of the melanoma
cells treated with UV-B (BrafV600E,
Pten-/-, Cdkn2a-/- cells, YUMMER1.7)
compared with the untreated parental
tumors (YUMM1.7). This was IFNgR-
dependent, correlating efficacy with the
increased somatic mutations and immu-
nogenic neoepitopes that are considered
hallmarks of human melanoma vulnera-
bility to immune checkpoint inhibitors.
Session 3: Stem cells and development
A focus of this session was develop-
ment and disease progression in
zebrafish models. David Parichy (Uni-
versity of Virginia, Charlottesville) pre-
sented his group’s work on single
cell RNA sequencing to identify
SA Leachman et al.
Melanoma to Vitiligo: Montagna/PASPCR Meeting 2018
Journal of Investigative Dermatology (2020), Volume 140270
Boer et al., 2017Domyanet al., 2014Vickrey et al., 2018Bagge et al., 2016Meeth et al., 2016
Previous PDFNext PDF
