This is the Enhanced Reader view. For maximum accessibility screen reader users should use the HTML format which is available on the article page for most content.
OutlineCited byFigures (2)
1/6



Previous PDFNext PDF
Article start
REVIEW ARTICLE Feature Issue: Update on Pulmonary Fibrosis
Research in Pulmonary Fibrosis
Across Species: Unleashing Discovery
Through Comparative Biology
Teresa Barnes, BS1, Kevin K. Brown, MD2,
Brendan Corcoran, MVD, DipPharm, PhD, MRCVS3,
Marilyn K. Glassberg, MD4, Dolly J. Kervitsky, RCP5,
Andrew H. Limper, MD6, Kay McGuire, DVM, MS7,
Kurt Williams, DVM, PhD8 and Jesse Roman, MD9,
for the Comparative Biology of Pulmonary Fibrosis Group
1 Independent Research and Patient Advocacy, Westie Foundation of America
Board of Directors, formerly with the Coalition for Pulmonary Fibrosis, Culver City,
California; 2 National Jewish Health, Denver, Colorado; 3 The Royal School of
Veterinary Studies and the Roslin Institute, University of Edinburgh, Midlothian, UK;
4 University of Miami, Miller School of Medicine Miami, Florida; 5 PF Strategies,
Golden, Colorado; 6 Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota; 7 Westie Foundation of
America; 8 College of Veterinary Medicine, Michigan State University, East Lansing,
Michigan; 9 Jane & Leonard Korman Respiratory Institute, Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
Key Indexing Terms: Comparative biology; Lung fibrosis; Recommendations. [Am J Med Sci 2019;357(5):399−404.]
P rogressive scarring of the lung, also termed pul-monary fibrosis, has become the focus of many
basic, translational and clinical investigations
throughout the world. To date, this research has revealed
much needed information about the epidemiology and
pathogenesis of pulmonary fibrosing disorders, with par-
ticular attention to idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF), the
most common of the idiopathic interstitial pneumonias
and the most devastating due to its poor prognosis.1
However, despite many recent advances, only 2
so-called antifibrotic drugs are currently approved for the
treatment of IPF; these drugs slow-down lung function
decline, but do not improve the condition, and their role
in other progressive fibrosing lung disorders remains
unknown.2 Thus, much research is still needed to gain
further insights into the pathogenesis of these disorders,
to identify reliable diagnostic and prognostic biomarkers,
and to develop effective and safe interventions that
improve survival. If successful, this resea:\c:rch has the
potential of positively affecting the natural course of
related fibrosing disorders of the skin, kidney, heart, liver
and other organs.
A major hindrance to progress in pulmonary fibrosis
research is the lack of animal models capable of better
resembling fibrosing lung disorders in humans and ade-
quately predicting the efficacy of new interventions.
Most animal models of pulmonary fibrosis available
today require induction of lung injury by exogenous
agents (e.g., bleomycin) and do not adequately model
human disease, thereby raising questions about their
utility in the quest for novel treatments.3 Even if animal
models were able to duplicate most of the characteristics
of human disease, such as the usual interstitial pneumo-
nia or UIP histologic pattern found in IPF, it would be dif-
ficult to duplicate the genetic and environmental factors
that contribute to disease development in humans. This,
compounded by the anatomic and behavior differences
between animals and humans, has prevented the devel-
opment of a truly relevant model.4
Interestingly, spontaneous progressive pulmonary
fibrosis is not restricted to humans. In fact, this disorder
has been recognized for over 2 decades in veterinary
medicine in a variety of domestic animal species includ-
ing cats, dogs and horses.5,6 Unfortunately, these disor-
ders have received little attention in the biomedical
community outside of veterinary medicine. Given that the
affected species are long-lived animals that share a com-
mon environment with humans, they might represent
relevant models of spontaneously occurring, progressive
lung fibrosis. If so, investigating pulmonary fibrosis in
these species could advance progress in this area.
Because of the potential of such approaches to
accelerate discovery and to promote awareness, com-
munication and collaboration regarding spontaneous
progressive fibrosing lung disorders in mammals, the
Westie Foundation of America (WFA) sponsored a 1-day
meeting in October 2007 held in Lafayette, Indiana, USA.
The WFA is the official breed association of the West
Highland Terrier, a breed of dogs that is known to be
afflicted with progressive lung fibrosis. This workshop
Copyright © 2019 Published by Elsevier Inc. on behalf of Southern Society for Clinical Investigation. This is an open access article under the
CC BY-NC-ND license. (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)
www.amjmedsci.com  www.ssciweb.org
399
Teresa BarnesKevin K. BrownBrendan CorcoranMarilyn K. GlassbergDolly J. KervitskyAndrew H. LimperKay McGuireKurt WilliamsJesse Roman12345,6
brought together international physicians, veterinarians,
pathologists, researchers and advocacy experts to dis-
cuss fibrotic lung disorders in humans and domestic
animals. Afterward, a working group of the American
Thoracic Society and participants of the initial workshop
reported on the workshop findings and made the
following recommendations7: (1) Promote the conduc-
tion of detailed descriptive studies in affected domestic
animals to define the clinical, imaging and pathologic
presentation of pulmonary fibrosis in these species;
(2) Emphasize the need for performing genetic studies
and other pathogenesis-based investigations in natu-
rally-occurring spontaneous models of pulmonary
fibrosis to investigate the potential translation to IPF in
humans as these models should provide more relevant
tools to investigate the potential effectiveness of novel
antifibrosis drugs in prehuman trials; (3) Emphasize the
need for studies defining the anatomic and cellular differ-
ences in the lungs of different species for the adequate
interpretation of discordant findings; (4) Stimulate the
generation of suitable reagents to adequately test
hypotheses in different species of animals; and (5) Pro-
mote the establishment of a consortium of interested
centers and a central repository of clinical information
and biologic specimens from naturally-occurring sponta-
neous models of lung fibrosis in domestic animals to
enable further research that may benefit both physicians
and veterinarians in their efforts to adequately manage
lung fibrosis in their patient populations.
In May 2014, a second meeting on Comparative
Biology of Pulmonary Fibrosis was held in Louisville,
Kentucky. As before, clinicians, researchers, veterinary
doctors, pathologists and patient advocates came
together to discuss the state of research in this field. The
meeting was again endorsed by members of the Working
Group on Lung Fibrosis of the Assembly of Respiratory
Cell and Molecular Biology of the American Thoracic
Society, and was supported by industry, The Westie
Foundation, The Morris Animal Foundation and The AKC
Canine Health Foundation. During the meeting, extensive
discussions surrounded the limited progress made in the
field since the first meeting. However, energized by the
potential this field of investigation could have on under-
standing fibrosing lung disorders, the team powered
through an ambitious agenda hoping to define a new
path for such efforts. The proceedings of this meeting
were not published; however, considering the perceived
importance of the discussions held, a group of meeting
organizers and participants came together to summarize
its proceedings in this document.
The group discussion first focused on the fact that
key clinical manifestations of pulmonary fibrosis are
common in both humans and domestic animals. These
similarities are best highlighted in recent publications
showing that in canine IPF, for example, the disease is a
chronic, progressive, interstitial lung disease affecting
mainly middle-aged and old West Highland white terri-
ers.8 It is clinically characterized by exercise intolerance,
restrictive dyspnea and coughing, and course crackles
are present on lung auscultation. Abnormal blood gases
and shortened “6-minute walk test” distance, a test that
evaluates endurance and gas exchange capability, are
common, and secondary pulmonary hypertension is not
infrequent.9 These data emphasize the striking similari-
ties in the clinical presentation of spontaneously occur-
ring pulmonary fibrosis observed in humans and
domestic animals as highlighted previously.7
More data about the imaging presentation of pulmo-
nary fibrosis in domestic animals have also emerged (see
Figure 1). In a retrospective study including 21 West
Highland white terriers (WHWT), the severity of pulmo-
nary computer tomography (CT) findings was positively
correlated with severity of clinical signs, and negatively
associated with survival time after diagnosis. The most
common CT findings included ground glass pattern
(16/21 dogs) and focal reticular and mosaic ground-glass
opacities (10/21 dogs), with very rare and minimal honey-
combing identified.10
In addition to the above, the group also discussed
that noted similarities between dogs and humans began
FIGURE 1. Computed tomography scan image of dog with pulmonary fibrosis. (A) Ground glass opacity in mildly affected dog. (B) Extensive
ground glass opacity with prominent mosaic attenuation in moderately affected dog. (C) Ground glass opacity, traction bronchiectasis and
parenchymal bands in severely affected dog.
Barnes et al
400 THE AMERICAN JOURNAL OF THE MEDICAL SCIENCES
VOLUME 357 NUMBER 5 MAY 2019
7897Figure 110
Previous PDFNext PDF
